During the present century Tibetan Buddhism ahas suffered a devastating diminution of it's once very 
extensive area of exclusive dominion, with the result that nowdays it is still prevalent only in 
Himalayan lands, Those which stretch from the northern frontier area to Pakistan and India, along the 
Northern region of the five hundred odd miles of the Nepalsese frontier bordering on Tibet itself, then in
Sikkim and Bhutan.and finally in the Northeast frontier areas of India where Assam borders upon Tibet.

It must be emphasized that Tibetan Buddhism is primarily a cultural and religious phenomenon and at second 
remove sometimes  a political force. The only non-Tibetan converts to Tibetan Buddhism were the Mongols gradually
converted from the thirteenth century onwards the manchus. It is often forgotten than Monchu emperors of China
upto the very end of their denasty in 1911, were Tibetan Buddhists and not Chinese Buddhists. It may be easily 
understood that the Tibetans with their extrairdinary religious preoccupations, have always chosen to interpret
first Mongol and then later, Manchu interest in their country as religious rather than political.

To those who are familiar only with the Buddhism of Shi Lanka and Southeast Asia. Tibetan Buddhism 
is liable to present itself or somthing entirely different certainity farmove colourful and complex and all to of then 
catigated as corrupt. The term 'Lamaism' which has been applied to it by some westerns during this century is
not altogether a happy term, but atleast it serve to emphasise the importance which the religious teacher.
[Tibetan: blamam pronounced "La-ma ": sanskrit:guru] plays in the Tibetan religion.

It is anything at all of special nature, which distinguishes Tibetan Buddhism from the other forms of Buddhism 
it should refer to the unusual importance attibuted to the "religious teacher" [Lama:guru], who has been essential
figure for the transmission of Buddhist teaching from the earliest times onwards wherever Buddhism has been spread 
through Asia. The conception of true religion as a transmission from a qualified mastre to a qualified pupil is quite 
as much as essential part of Buddhism.

Special literature or foundation of Tibetan Buddhism:
	In early days period, kings that chieftains ruled and lamas were precisely whats they have always
been in order Buddhist countries namely, renowed men of religion some of whom became heads of manastic 
establishments.

Different parts of Tibet, just as of China, and so many other lands are differentiated by great variations in dialect,
but the creation of a single literacy language in use throughout the whole ethnic area, produced spontaneously 
a sence of cultural unity.
The canonical Buddhist literature of Tibet is almost exclusively compiled from Tibetan translation of Indian Buddhist
literature. Tibetan Buddhism has been forced to maintain a tradition of high learning and this would seem to justify 
to some extent the special importance of their religious teachers[lamas].

Every order of Tibetan Buddhism has prduced over the centuries its own traditional literature, all based upon great
canon, known as the Kanjur or [Buddha] word, together with writing and commentaries of Indian origin, known as 
the Tanjur[Translated treatise]. Tibetan literature consists of learned summaries, connectaries, biographical 
work , religiously history and doctarinal works. The monks of any particular religion orde hare a prediction  for the 
works of their own lands.

Religion art:
It is impossible to omit some reference to arts in writing of Tibetan Buddhism, for its most forceful means of expression 
is precisely through its art and it is in fact through this medium that Tibetans and related Tibetan speakers gain most 
first hand knowledge of their religion.

The "wheel of life" with its carefully depicted prospects of happiness. and suffering in accordance with the effects of
one's own deeds, goods or evil, appears in the porch of every Tibetan Temple, and it is this symbolic design rather 
than treatises on the subject that passes home these teachings. They know their symbolic forms from the paintings
and images which they keep in a special room in their own homes. 

 